Greetings,

I would like to announce a project that may be of interest to the
Pedometrics / DSM groups. The Algorithms for Quantitative Pedology (AQP)
project was started as a place to put some of the functions I used on a daily
basis. It slowly grew into a collection of algorithms that support studies
related to soil genesis, taxonomy, and mapping. The short list of
functionality includes:

- classes for storing and manipulating soil profile data
- functions for plotting soil profile sketches
- color conversion functions (Munsell to RGB)
- plotting functions for groups of soil profiles
- plotting functions for depth-functions + uncertainty estimates
- functions for re-sampling genetic horizons to regular sequences
- profile aggregation functions
- an implementation of between-profile dissimilarity calculation
- functions for re-sampling XRD patterns to a common basis
- functions for performing full-pattern matching of XRD patterns

Obviously, this project is far from an exhaustive implementation of what the
name might otherwise suggest.

My reasoning for putting this package together is based on the premise that
methods used by pedologists have grown with our understanding of natural
systems and our ability to work with larger and larger datasets-- however,
coupling of theory and practice to modern numerical methods is rare outside
of academic circles. That is not to say that federal agencies and the soil
science community are not catching up. Rather, it seems like the adoption of
these new approaches can by hindered by a lack of an implementation that is
more accessible than an article in a scientific journal. I am speaking from
my experience in the western United States, therefore I apologies if I have
not adequately described corresponding conditions in other parts of the
world.

The naming of the package. It is currently named "Algorithms for Quantitative
Pedology", inspired by Jenny's treatise on the topic. It could be argued that
most modern pedologic studies (i.e. on the topic of soil genesis, morphology,
classification, and mapping) are by and large a quantitative effort-- so this
name may be more of a convenient acronym than descriptive label. In naming
this package I was hoping to encapsulate the idea of how modern numerical
methods might be applied to the field of pedology. Well, the
word "Pedometrics" does a pretty good job of conveying that idea. In
particular, it falls well in line with Alex's initial description of
Pedometrics:

“the application of mathematical and statistical methods for the study of the
distribution and genesis of soils.”

On the other hand, the potential for a diffuse interpretation of the
word "Pedometrics" could lead to a package that lacks focus and ultimately
critical mass. In that case, an entire suite of related R packages would
likely work. There are several cases on CRAN / R-Forge where large efforts
are split into several, related packages. In addition, the term 'Pedometrics'
means many different things to many different people.

I would like to present a couple ideas on how this project, and extensions of
it, might function as a liaison between rapid advances in the realm of
Pedometrics and those interested in the application of these methods.

1. R is an ideal environment for working with soils information and the
packaging system is a robust approach to encapsulating code, documentation,
and discussion.

2. A suite of R packages, each geared towards a specific realm of what most
soil scientists do (or would like to do) with their data, may be one way in
which common work flows can be streamlined and better documented. These
packages would be the vehicle by which theory, defined in academic journals,
could be translated into well-documented tools for a wider range of
practitioners.

3. Within this suite, a master package (why not call it "pedometrics") could
contain classes and utility functions for describing and manipulating objects
that represent the complex structure of a soil profile. The companion
packages would build on these common data structures and methods, making the
implementation of newly discovered or experimental methods much simpler.

4. The R-Forge system would facilitate concurrent access to the source code
and documentation through the use of revision control. In this way, changes
would be documented, and versions could be seamlessly forked or merged so
that rapid development would not result in an unstable product.


Ultimately, I am interested in getting modern tools into the hands of current
pedologists, and making it simpler for the adoption of these tools by new
pedologists. If you are interested in these efforts, have comments or
criticisms please don't hesitate to contact me. There is a mini-manual with
an extended discussion on the AQP package, included in the source. I would
encourage anyone that is interested to check the R-Forge site:

http://aqp.r-forge.r-project.org/

A slightly older version is available on CRAN:
http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/aqp/


Cheers,
Dylan